README.md, before:

# 🚀 Compi: C-to-VHDL Compiler

Compi is a tool that translates C source code into VHDL hardware descriptions.  
Easily convert your algorithms from software to hardware! 🖥️➡️🔌

## ✨ Features

- 📝 Lexical analysis of C code (tokenizer)
- 🏗️ Parsing of function declarations, parameter lists, variable declarations, assignments, return statements, and `if`/`else if`/`else` control flow
- ➕ Expression parsing with proper precedence and associativity:
    - Arithmetic: `+ - * /`
    - Shifts: `<< >>`
    - Bitwise: `& | ^`
    - Comparisons: `== != < <= > >=`
    - Logical: `&& ||` and unary `!`
    - Unary minus: `-x`
- 🧱 Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) construction with improved visualization (named nodes for binary/unary ops, if/else-if/else)
- 🛠️ Generation of VHDL entities and architecture skeletons
- 🔄 Automatic type mapping between C types (`int`, `float`, `double`, `char`) and VHDL types
- 🗂️ Example C files for testing in `examples/`
- 📚 Sphinx documentation in `docs/` with Read the Docs theme
- ✅ Array support:
   - Parse and generate VHDL for C arrays of types `int`, `float`, `double`, and `char`
   - Array declaration and initialization: `int arr[3] = {1,2,3};`, `float arr[2] = {1.0, 2.5};`, `char arr[4] = {'a','b','c','d'};`
   - Array access and assignment: `arr[i] = x;`, `y = arr[j];`
   - Returning array elements: `return arr[i];`
   - Full index expressions inside brackets: `arr[i+1]`, `arr[(j<<1)+k]`, `return arr[2*i]`
   - Type mapping:
      - `int[]` → `std_logic_vector(31 downto 0)`
      - `float[]`, `double[]` → `real`
      - `char[]` → `character`
   - Initializers are converted to valid VHDL literals for each type
   - Array element access and assignment use VHDL syntax: `arr(i)`

## 🛠️ Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/cmelnu/compi.git
cd compi
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

## ▶️ Usage

```bash
./compi input.c output.vhdl
```

### Debugging

Print the AST for debugging:
```bash
./compi -d input.c output.vhdl
```

This prints a readable AST where expression nodes are labeled, e.g.:

```
NODE_FUNCTION_DECL: foo (return type: int)
   NODE_STATEMENT
      NODE_ASSIGNMENT
         NODE_EXPRESSION: x
         NODE_BINARY_EXPR: &&
            NODE_EXPRESSION: x
            NODE_EXPRESSION: 7
   NODE_STATEMENT
      NODE_UNARY_OP: !
         NODE_EXPRESSION: x
```

## 📖 Documentation

Sphinx documentation is available in the `docs/` folder.  
To build the docs:
```bash
cmake --build . --target docs
"$BROWSER" docs/build/html/index.html
```

## 🧹 Cleaning

To remove build artifacts and documentation output:
```bash
cmake --build . --target clean-all
```

## 🗂️ Project Structure

- `src/` — Source code (.c, .h files)
- `examples/` — Example C files for testing
- `docs/` — Sphinx documentation
- `build/` — Build output
- `CMakeLists.txt` — Build configuration
- `.gitignore` — Git ignore rules

## 🚧 Known Issues

- Signal name collision for local variable 'result' in VHDL output ports (should be renamed to 'internal_result')
- Global variables not yet implemented
- Logical operators are implemented as combinational boolean expressions; C short-circuit evaluation semantics are not modeled in hardware
- No support for `while` and `for` control flow statements
- VHDL codegen does not optimize for hardware resources or timing

## ✅ Supported operators and semantics

- Arithmetic: `+ - * /` are emitted as VHDL arithmetic on unsigned/signed as needed
- Shifts: `<< >>` map to `shift_left/shift_right`
- Bitwise: `& | ^` map to VHDL `and / or / xor` on `unsigned(...)`
- Comparisons: `== != < <= > >=` map to VHDL comparisons; numeric literals/identifiers are cast using `to_unsigned/to_signed/unsigned(...)` as appropriate
- Logical: `&& ||` are emitted as boolean `and/or` after booleanizing each operand as `(unsigned(expr) /= 0)` if not already boolean
- Unary: `-x` (unary minus) and `!x` (logical not). `!x` becomes `not ( ... )` if boolean; otherwise `(unsigned(expr) = 0)`

## 🗺️ Roadmap

Here’s what’s planned next for Compi, based on the current state of `parse.c` and recent development:

### ✅ Current Capabilities
- Function declarations and parameter parsing
- Variable declarations and initializations
- Assignment statements (`x = value;`)
- Return statements with expressions
- AST construction and visualization
- Parsing and code generation for `if`, `else if`, and `else` statements
- Support for unary minus and negative literals/identifiers in expressions
- Basic VHDL code generation with type mapping

### 🚧 Roadmap

1. **Expression Parsing Improvements**
   - Support binary operations (e.g., `a + b`, `x * 2`)
   - Handle operator precedence and parentheses

2. **Control Flow Statements**
   - Parse and represent `while` and `for` statements in the AST
   - Generate VHDL comments or skeletons for control flow

3. **Global Variable Support**
   - Parse and represent global variable declarations
   - Generate VHDL for global signals

4. **Function Calls**
   - Parse function calls within expressions and statements
   - Inline or generate VHDL for simple calls

5. **Error Handling & Diagnostics**
   - Improve error messages and diagnostics for unsupported constructs

6. **VHDL Codegen Enhancements**
   - Optimize generated VHDL for hardware resources and timing
   - Handle signal name collisions (e.g., local `result`)

7. **Documentation & Examples**
   - Expand Sphinx documentation with module, function, and data structure details
   - Add more example C files and expected VHDL outputs

---

Contributions and feedback are welcome!  
Join the discussion and development at [GitHub - cmelnu/compi](https://github.com/cmelnu/compi)

Commit message:

Update documentation and README: add debug mode (-d) AST visualization, improved error reporting with line numbers, and clarify supported features.
README.md: Document debug mode (-d) and error line reporting.
docs/source/usage.rst: Add debug mode and error diagnostics info.
docs/source/known_issues.rst: Remove outdated notes, clarify control flow support, add error line and debug mode info.
docs/source/modules.rst: Note error line reporting and debug mode in relevant modules.
docs/source/examples.rst: Add debug mode and error reporting info to examples section.

README.md, after:

# 🚀 Compi: C-to-VHDL Compiler

Compi is a tool that translates C source code into VHDL hardware descriptions.  
Easily convert your algorithms from software to hardware! 🖥️➡️🔌

## ✨ Features

- 📝 Lexical analysis of C code (tokenizer)
- 🏗️ Parsing of function declarations, parameter lists, variable declarations, assignments, return statements, and `if`/`else if`/`else` control flow
- ➕ Expression parsing with proper precedence and associativity:
    - Arithmetic: `+ - * /`
    - Shifts: `<< >>`
    - Bitwise: `& | ^`
    - Comparisons: `== != < <= > >=`
    - Logical: `&& ||` and unary `!`
    - Unary minus: `-x`
- 🧱 Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) construction with improved visualization (named nodes for binary/unary ops, if/else-if/else)
- 🛠️ Generation of VHDL entities and architecture skeletons
- 🔄 Automatic type mapping between C types (`int`, `float`, `double`, `char`) and VHDL types
- 🗂️ Example C files for testing in `examples/`
- 📚 Sphinx documentation in `docs/` with Read the Docs theme
- ✅ Array support:
   - Parse and generate VHDL for C arrays of types `int`, `float`, `double`, and `char`
   - Array declaration and initialization: `int arr[3] = {1,2,3};`, `float arr[2] = {1.0, 2.5};`, `char arr[4] = {'a','b','c','d'};`
   - Array access and assignment: `arr[i] = x;`, `y = arr[j];`
   - Returning array elements: `return arr[i];`
   - Full index expressions inside brackets: `arr[i+1]`, `arr[(j<<1)+k]`, `return arr[2*i]`
   - Type mapping:
      - `int[]` → `std_logic_vector(31 downto 0)`
      - `float[]`, `double[]` → `real`
      - `char[]` → `character`
   - Initializers are converted to valid VHDL literals for each type
   - Array element access and assignment use VHDL syntax: `arr(i)`

## 🛠️ Installation

```bash
git clone https://github.com/cmelnu/compi.git
cd compi
mkdir build
cd build
cmake ..
make
```

## ▶️ Usage

```bash
./compi input.c output.vhdl
```


### Debugging & Error Reporting

**Debug mode (-d):**

Print the AST for debugging:
```bash
./compi -d input.c output.vhdl
```

This prints a readable AST tree with labeled nodes and branches, making it easier to understand the structure of parsed code and debug issues.

**Improved error diagnostics:**

When a parsing error occurs, the compiler now reports the exact line number in the source file where the error was detected. For example:

```
Error (line 15): Expected ';' after variable declaration
```

This helps quickly locate and fix syntax errors in your C source files.

## 📖 Documentation

Sphinx documentation is available in the `docs/` folder.  
To build the docs:
```bash
cmake --build . --target docs
"$BROWSER" docs/build/html/index.html
```

## 🧹 Cleaning

To remove build artifacts and documentation output:
```bash
cmake --build . --target clean-all
```

## 🗂️ Project Structure

- `src/` — Source code (.c, .h files)
- `examples/` — Example C files for testing
- `docs/` — Sphinx documentation
- `build/` — Build output
- `CMakeLists.txt` — Build configuration
- `.gitignore` — Git ignore rules

## 🚧 Known Issues

- Signal name collision for local variable 'result' in VHDL output ports (should be renamed to 'internal_result')
- Global variables not yet implemented
- Logical operators are implemented as combinational boolean expressions; C short-circuit evaluation semantics are not modeled in hardware
- No support for `while` and `for` control flow statements
- VHDL codegen does not optimize for hardware resources or timing

## ✅ Supported operators and semantics

- Arithmetic: `+ - * /` are emitted as VHDL arithmetic on unsigned/signed as needed
- Shifts: `<< >>` map to `shift_left/shift_right`
- Bitwise: `& | ^` map to VHDL `and / or / xor` on `unsigned(...)`
- Comparisons: `== != < <= > >=` map to VHDL comparisons; numeric literals/identifiers are cast using `to_unsigned/to_signed/unsigned(...)` as appropriate
- Logical: `&& ||` are emitted as boolean `and/or` after booleanizing each operand as `(unsigned(expr) /= 0)` if not already boolean
- Unary: `-x` (unary minus) and `!x` (logical not). `!x` becomes `not ( ... )` if boolean; otherwise `(unsigned(expr) = 0)`

## 🗺️ Roadmap

Here’s what’s planned next for Compi, based on the current state of `parse.c` and recent development:

### ✅ Current Capabilities
- Function declarations and parameter parsing
- Variable declarations and initializations
- Assignment statements (`x = value;`)
- Return statements with expressions
- AST construction and visualization
- Parsing and code generation for `if`, `else if`, and `else` statements
- Support for unary minus and negative literals/identifiers in expressions
- Basic VHDL code generation with type mapping

### 🚧 Roadmap

1. **Expression Parsing Improvements**
   - Support binary operations (e.g., `a + b`, `x * 2`)
   - Handle operator precedence and parentheses

2. **Control Flow Statements**
   - Parse and represent `while` and `for` statements in the AST
   - Generate VHDL comments or skeletons for control flow

3. **Global Variable Support**
   - Parse and represent global variable declarations
   - Generate VHDL for global signals

4. **Function Calls**
   - Parse function calls within expressions and statements
   - Inline or generate VHDL for simple calls

5. **Error Handling & Diagnostics**
   - Improve error messages and diagnostics for unsupported constructs

6. **VHDL Codegen Enhancements**
   - Optimize generated VHDL for hardware resources and timing
   - Handle signal name collisions (e.g., local `result`)

7. **Documentation & Examples**
   - Expand Sphinx documentation with module, function, and data structure details
   - Add more example C files and expected VHDL outputs

---

Contributions and feedback are welcome!  
Join the discussion and development at [GitHub - cmelnu/compi](https://github.com/cmelnu/compi)
